Foot racing is a popular activity in the United States. It is seen not only as a competitive
sport but also as a way to exercise, to enjoy the camaraderie of like-minded people, and to
donate money to a good cause. Though serious runners may spend months training to
compete, other runners and walkers might not train at all. Those not competing to win might run
in an effort to beat their own time or simply to enjoy the fun and exercise. People of all ages,
from those of less than one year who may be pushed in strollers to those in their eighties,
enter into this sport. The races are held on city streets, on college campuses, through parks,
and in suburban areas, and they are commonly 5 to 10 kilometers in length.
The largest foot race in the world is the 12-kilometer Bay to Breakers race that is held in San
Francisco every spring. This race begins on the east side of the city near San Francisco Bay
and ends on the west side at the Pacific Ocean. There may be 80,000 or more people running
in this race through the streets and hills of San Francisco. In the front are the serious runners
who compete to win and who might finish in as little as 34 minutes. Behind them are the
thousands 20 who take several hours to finish. In the back of the race are those who dress in
costumes and come just for fun. One year there was a group of men who dressed like Elvis
Presley, and another group consisted of firefighters who were tied together in a long line and
who were carrying a fire hose. There was even a bridal party, in which the bride was dressed in
a long white gown and the groom wore a tuxedo. The bride and groom threw flowers to
bystanders, and they were actually married at some point along the route.
Very few people in the modern world obtain their food supply by hunting and gathering in
the natural environment surrounding their homes. This method of harvesting from nature’s
provision is the oldest known subsistence strategy and has been practised for at least the last
two million years. It was, indeed, the only way to obtain food until rudimentary farming and the
domestication of wild animals were introduced about 10,000 years ago.
Because hunter-gatherers have fared poorly in comparison with their agricultural cousins,
their numbers have dwindled, and they have been forced to live in marginal environments, such
as deserts and arctic wastelands. In higher latitudes, the shorter growing seasons have
restricted the availability of plant life. Such conditions have caused a greater dependence on
hunting, and on fishing along the coasts and waterways. The abundance of vegetation in the
lower latitudes of the tropics, on the other hand, has provided a greater opportunity for gathering
a variety of plants. In short, the environmental differences have restricted the diet and have
limited possibilities for the development of subsistence societies.
Contemporary hunter-gatherers may help us understand our prehistoric ancestors. We
know from the observation of modern hunter-gatherers in both Africa and Alaska that a society
based on hunting and gathering must be very mobile. While the entire community camps in a
central location, a smaller party harvests the food within a reasonable distance from the camp.
When the food in the area has become exhausted, the community moves on to exploit another
site. We also notice seasonal migration patterns evolving for most hunter-gatherers, along with
a strict division of labor between the sexes. These patterns of behavior may be similar to those
practised by mankind during the Paleolithic Period.
